Revise chapter on "Package structure" (part 1 of n) (#586)
hadley/r-pkgs: Structure.Rmd

> # Package structure {#package-structure}

Reviewer: Either is fine with me

> # Package structure {#package-structure}

Author: I went for it.

```{r, include = FALSE}
source("common.R")
```

> This chapter will start you on the road to package development by converting the implicit knowledge you've gained from *using* R packages into the explicit knowledge needed to *create and modify* them. You'll learn about the various states a package can be in and the difference between a package and library (and why you should care). Finally, you'll get a blueprint for creating your own packages *de novo*.

Reviewer: Generally I use italics for emphasis and bold for defining terms.

## What is a package? {#package}

> When you create or modify a package, you work on its "source code" or "source files". You interact with the in-development package in its *source form*. This is not the package form you are most familiar with from day-to-day usage. Package development workflows make much more sense if you understand the five states an R package can be in:

Reviewer: If you're attempting to make "source form" a definition, I'd bold it, and restructure the sentence to make it more clear you're defining this as a new term

  * source
  * bundled
  * binary
  * installed
  * in-memory
  

> You already know some of the functions that put packages into these states. For example, `install.packages()` and `devtools::install_github()` move a package into the installed state, from one of the forms earlier in the list. The `library()` function loads an installed package into memory, making it available for immediate and direct use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You already know some of the functions that put packages into these states. For example, `install.packages()` and `devtools::install_github()` move a package from source, bundled, or binary states into the installed state. The `library()` function loads an installed package into memory, making it available for immediate and direct use.
```

### Source package

> A __source__ package is just a directory of files, with a very specific structure. It includes particular components, such as a `DESCRIPTION` file, an `R/` directory containing `.R` files, and so on. Most of the remaining chapters in this book are dedicated to detailing these components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A __source__ package is just a directory of files with a specific structure. It includes particular components, such as a `DESCRIPTION` file, an `R/` directory containing `.R` files, and so on. Most of the remaining chapters in this book are dedicated to detailing these components.
```

If you are new to package development, you may have never seen a package in source form! You might not even have any source packages on your computer. The easiest way to see a package in source form right away is to browse around its code on the web.

Many R packages are developed in the open on GitHub (or GitLab or similar). The best case scenario is that you visit the package's CRAN landing page, e.g.:

>   - forcats: <https://cran.r-project.org/package=forcats>

Reviewer: In terms of consistent style, I always use `*` for bulleted lists.

>   - stringr: <https://cran.r-project.org/package=stringr>

Author: In hindsight, I wish I'd chosen one simple package (forcats) and one with compiled code (readxl?). Might go back and do this.

Reviewer: Yeah, I think that's worth it.

Author: Done.

    
and one of its URLs links to a repository on a public hosting service, e.g.:

  - forcats: <https://github.com/tidyverse/forcats>
  - stringr: <https://github.com/tidyverse/stringr>
  
Some maintainers forget to list this URL, even though the package is developed in a public repository, but you still might be able to discover it via search.
    
Even if a package is not developed on a public platform, you can visit its source in the unofficial, read-only mirror maintained by [METACRAN](https://r-pkg.org/about). Examples:

  - MASS: <https://github.com/cran/MASS>
  - car: <https://github.com/cran/car>

> ### Bundled package

Reviewer: Yup

In the rare case that you need to make a bundle from a package you're developing locally, use `devtools::build()`. Under the hood, this calls `pkgbuild::build()` and, ultimately, `R CMD build`, which is described further in the [Building package tarballs][wre-tarball] secion of [Writing R Extensions][wre].

Every CRAN package is available in this form, via the "Package source" field of individual landing pages. Continuing our examples from above, you could download the bundles `forcats_0.4.0.tar.gz` and `stringr_1.4.0.tar.gz` (or whatever the current versions may be). You could unpack such a bundle in the shell (not the R console) like so:

```bash
tar xvf forcats_0.4.0.tar.gz
```

If you decompress a bundle, you'll see it looks almost the same as a source package. This diagram summarises the files present in the top-level directory for source, bundled, and binary versions of devtools.

> *TODO: Remake this, possibly with a different (fictional or deliberately crafted?) package. Things I want to address: README.Rmd, .github/, CI config, pkgdown, LICENSE.md, data-raw/, updated treatment of NEWS.md, existence of vignettes/ in tarball, presence of build/ in tarball, absence of README.md in binary form.*

Author: https://github.com/hadley/r-pkgs/issues/587

```{r, echo = FALSE}
knitr::include_graphics("diagrams/package-files.png")
```

The main differences between a source package and an uncompressed bundle are:

* Vignettes have been built, so rendered outputs, such as HTML, appear below
  `inst/doc/` and a vignette index appears in the `build/` directory, usually
  alongside a PDF package manual.

* A local source package might contain temporary files used to save time during
  development, like compilation artefacts in `src/`. These are never found in 
  a bundle.

* Any files listed in `.Rbuildignore` are not included in the bundle. These are
  typically files that facilitate your development process, but that should be
  excluded from the distributed product.

> #### `.Rbuildignore` {#rbuildignore}

Author: As I worked on this, it became clear it's a pretty important topic and deserved a sub-header for link-ability.

You won't need to contemplate the exact structure of package `.tar.gz` files very often, but you do need to understand the `.Rbuildignore` file. It controls which files from the source package make it into the downstream forms.

> Each line of `.Rbuildignore` is a Perl-compatible regular expression that is matched, without regard to case, against the path to each file in the source package, i.e. the result of `dir(full.names = TRUE, recursive = TRUE, include.dirs = TRUE, all.files = TRUE)` run from the package's top-level directory. If the regular expression matches, that file or directory is excluded. Note there are some default exclusions implemented by R itself, mostly relating to classic version control systems and editors, such as SVN, Git, and Emacs.

Author: The 1st edition alluded to `dir(full.names = TRUE)` re: listing all the relevant filepaths. But if we're going to give literal R code, I think what I give above is more accurate. Which makes me question whether we should really give code or just use prose.

Reviewer: Maybe include the code in a footnote? It's not that important that people know it, but it might be useful for debugging a wonky `.Rbuildignore`

Author: Footnote-ized.

`.Rbuildignore` is a way to resolve some of the tension between the practices that support your development process and CRAN's requirements for submission and distribution. The affected files fall into two broad, semi-overlapping classes:

  * Files that help you generate package contents programmatically. Examples:
    - Using `README.Rmd` to generate an informative and current `README.md`.
    - Storing `.R` scripts to create and update internal or exported data.
  * Files that drive package development, checking, and documentation, outside
    of CRAN's purview. Examples:
    - Files relating to the RStudio IDE.
    - Using the [pkgdown package](https://pkgdown.r-lib.org) to generate a
      website.
    - Configuration files related to continuous integration/deployment and 
      monitoring test coverage.

Here is a non-exhaustive list of typical entries in the `.Rbuildignore` file for a package in the tidyverse:

```

> ^.*\.Rproj$         # Designates the directory as an RStudio Project

Reviewer: I think you should say "Ignores the RStudio project file"

Author: I'm not doing this because then it seems very un-parallel to the comments describing all the other lines. Let's discuss if you feel strongly I'm wrong about this.

^\.Rproj\.user$     # Used by RStudio for temporary files
^README\.Rmd$       # An Rmd file used to generate README.md
^LICENSE\.md$       # Full text of the license
^cran-comments\.md$ # Comments for CRAN submission
^\.travis\.yml$     # Used by Travis-CI for continuous integration testing
^data-raw$          # Code used to create data included in the package
^pkgdown$           # Resources used for the package website
^_pkgdown\.yml$     # Configuration info for the package website
^\.github$          # Contributing guidelines, CoC, issue templates, etc.

> ```

Author: This section saw quite a bit of revision because the world and our practices have changed.

Note that the comments above are not generally present in `.Rbuildignore`; they are included here only for exposition.

We'll mention when you need to add files to `.Rbuildignore` whenever it's important. Remember that `usethis::use_build_ignore()` is an attractive way to manage this file.

### Binary package

If you want to distribute your package to an R user who doesn't have package development tools, you'll need to make a __binary__ package. Like a package bundle, a binary package is a single file. Unlike a bundled package, a binary package is platform specific and there are two basic flavors: Windows and macOS. (Linux users are generally required to have the tools necessary to install from `.tar.gz` files.)

> 

Author: Trying to word in such a way that doesn't deny the existence of prebuilt linux binaries, but also reflect what's currently mainstream practice.

Reviewer: I think this needs a bit more to say that the group that builds most binaries is CRAN; generally, if you're making a public package, you'll rely on CRAN to build the binaries (and that's one of the most compelling reasons to get your package on CRAN).

> Binary packages for macOS are stored as `.tgz`, whereas Windows binary packages end in `.zip`. If you need to make a binary package, use `devtools::build(binary = TRUE)` on the relevant operating system. Under the hood, this calls `pkgbuild::build(binary = TRUE)` and, ultimately, `R CMD INSTALL --build`, which is described further in the [Building binary packages][wre-binary] secion of [Writing R Extensions][wre].

Reviewer: Do you think it's that useful to include the devtools code snippets in the text? Most people won't ever call them, so I wonder if they could be relegated to one big diagram at the end of the chapter.

Author: I basically do think these are useful, but I take your point. I'm going to leave this here for now for a couple reasons:

  * I think people (myself included) use this book in various ways and one of them is as a reference or for (re-)learning about things you don't do very often.
  * I think it's better accessibility-wise to avoid putting code (only) in a diagram.
  * We can always revisit this later, when/if better or more diagrams are in place.

  basically the result of loading all the R code and then saving the
  functions with `save()`. (In the process, this adds a little extra metadata to 
  make things as fast as possible).

* A `Meta/` directory contains a number of `.rds` files. These files contain 
  cached metadata about the package, like what topics the help files cover and
  a parsed version of the `DESCRIPTION` file. (You can use `readRDS()` to see 
  exactly what's in those files). These files make package loading faster
  by caching costly computations.

* The actual help content appears in `help/` and `html/` (no longer in `man/`).

* If you had any code in the `src/` directory, there will now be a `libs/`
  directory that contains the results of compiling the code. On Windows, there
  are subdirectories for 32 bit (`i386/`) and 64 bit (`x64/`) environments.

* If you had any objects in `data/`, they have now been converted into a more
  efficient form.
  
* The contents of `inst/` are moved to the top-level directory. For example,
  vignette files are now in `doc/`.

* Some files and folders have been dropped, such as `README`, `build/`, `tests/`,

>   and `vignettes/`.

Author: The last few bullet points are revised or new.

> ### Installed package

Author: Dilemma: it feels like pak should come up here. But also that it's too early for me to write such a section. Do I just leave a TODO to revist later?

Reviewer: Why do you think pak is important here?

Author: pak's mission statement:

> pak installs R packages from CRAN, Bioconductor, GitHub, and local files and directories. It is an alternative to `install.packages()` and `devtools::install_github()`.

So it feels very relevant to this section.

An __installed__ package is a binary package that's been decompressed into a package library (described in \@ref(library)). The following diagram illustrates the many ways a package can be installed. This diagram is complicated! In an ideal world, installing a package would involve stringing together a set of simple steps: source -> bundle, bundle -> binary, binary -> installed. In the real world, it's not this simple because there are often (faster) shortcuts available.

> ```{r, echo = FALSE}

Reviewer: Figures usually should have `output.width = NULL` so that they're sized naturally according to their actual size. For large figures (like this one?), you should probably also add a caption so that they float.

Author: I think the relevant chunk option is `out.width` (???) and I couldn't get happy things to happen with `NULL` but I did with `out.width = "100%"`. I imagine my understanding of this and general figure mechanics are sub-par but will be forced to improve.

Added captions to two figures covered by this PR and will continue adding as I work through the book.

knitr::include_graphics("diagrams/installation.png")
```

The built-in command line tool `R CMD INSTALL` powers all package installation. It can install a package from source files, a bundle (a.k.a. a source tarball), or a binary package. Details are available in the [Installing packages section][ria-install] of [R Installation and Administration][ria]. Just like with `devtools::build()`, devtools provides a wrapper function, `devtools::install()`, that makes this tool available from within an R session.

Most useRs understandably like to install packages from the comfort of an R session and directly from CRAN. The built-in function `install.packages()` meets this need. It can download the package, in various forms, install it, and optionally attend to the installation of dependencies.

> Devtools offers a family of `install_*()` functions to address some needs beyond the reach of `install.packages()` or to make existing capabilities easier to access:

Reviewer: We don't capitalise package names, even at the start of sentences.

```{r}
library(devtools)

> funs <- as.character(lsf.str("package:devtools"))

Reviewer: Better to inspect remotes now?

grep("^install_.+", funs, value = TRUE)
```

`devtools::install_github()` is the flagship example of a sub-family of functions that can download a package from a remote location that is not CRAN and do whatever is necessary to install it. `install_github()` and friends are actually provided by the [remotes package](https://remotes.r-lib.org) and are re-exported by devtools. The rest of the devtools/remotes `install_*()` functions are aimed at making things that are technically possible with base tooling a bit easier or more explicit, such as `install_version()` which installs a specific version of a CRAN package.

> 

Author: Heavily reworked.

 Analogous to `.Rbuildignore`, described in section \@ref(rbuildignore), `.Rinstignore` lets you keep files present in a package bundle out of the installed package. However, in contrast to `.Rbuildignore`, this is rather obscure and rarely needed.

### In-memory package

> *TODO: putting something here, so I can comment in my PR.*

Author: I haven't revised this section yet. I almost think it can go away?

I think all of this content is better off in the workflow sections (later in this chapter, next to be revised) and the chapter where `NAMESPACE` is handled. One way to look at it: all of the package forms addressed in "What is a package?" are defined in terms of the filesystem.

Nothing below here has changed, other than being involved in the rearrangement of sections.

Reviewer: Agreed.  

Should we remove in-memory from the chapter all together?

Author: Kept it, to complete the story arc. But trimmed it down, with promises of greater coverage in those other places.

To use a package, you must load it into memory. To use it without providing the package name (e.g. `install()` instead of `devtools::install()`), you need to attach it to the search path. R loads packages automatically when you use them. `library()` (and the later discussed `require()`) load, then attach an installed package.

```{r, eval = FALSE}
# Automatically loads devtools
devtools::install()
    
# Loads and _attaches_ devtools to the search path
library(devtools)
install()
```

The distinction between loading and attaching packages is not important when you're writing scripts, but it's very important when you're writing packages. You'll learn more about the difference and why it's important in [search path](#search-path).

`library()` is not useful when you're developing a package because you have to install the package first. In future chapters you'll learn about `devtools::load_all()` and RStudio's "Build and reload", which allows you to skip install and load a source package directly into memory:

```{r, echo = FALSE}
knitr::include_graphics("diagrams/loading.png")
```

## What is a library? {#library}

> A library is simply a directory containing installed packages. You can have multiple libraries on your computer. In fact, almost every one has at least two: one for packages you’ve installed, and one for the packages that come with every R installation (like base, stats, etc). Normally, the directories with user-installed packages vary based on the version of R that you’re using. That's why it seems like you lose all of your packages when you reinstall R --- they're still on your hard drive, but R can't find them. 

Reviewer: Needs a segue

Author: Yeah nothing from "What is a library?" on has been touched in this PR. Will tackle separately.

lapply(.libPaths(), dir)
#> [[1]]
#>   [1] "AnnotationDbi"   "ash"             "assertthat"     
#>   ...      
#> [163] "xtable"          "yaml"            "zoo"            
#> 
#> [[2]]
#>  [1] "base"         "boot"         "class"        "cluster"     
#>  [5] "codetools"    "compiler"     "datasets"     "foreign"     
#>  [9] "graphics"     "grDevices"    "grid"         "KernSmooth"  
#> [13] "lattice"      "MASS"         "Matrix"       "methods"     
#> [17] "mgcv"         "nlme"         "nnet"         "parallel"    
#> [21] "rpart"        "spatial"      "splines"      "stats"       
#> [25] "stats4"       "survival"     "tcltk"        "tools"       
#> [29] "translations" "utils"
```

The first lib path is for the packages I've installed (I've installed a lot!). The second is for so-called "recommended" packages that come with every installation of R.

When you use `library(pkg)` or `require(pkg)` to load a package, R looks through each path in `.libPaths()` to see if a directory called `pkg` exists. If it doesn't exist, you'll get an error message:

```{r, error = TRUE}
library(blah)
# or:
require(blah)
```

> The main difference between `library()` and `require()` is what happens if a package isn't found. While `library()` throws an error, `require()` prints a warning message and returns FALSE. In practice, this distinction isn't important because when building a package you should __NEVER__ use either inside a package. See [package dependencies](#dependencies) for what you should do instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main difference between `library()` and `require()` is what happens if a package isn't found. While `library()` throws an error, `require()` prints a warning message and returns `FALSE`. In practice, this distinction isn't important because when building a package you should __NEVER__ use either inside a package. See [package dependencies](#dependencies) for what you should do instead.
```

When you start learning R, it's easy to get confused between libraries and packages because you use `library()` function to load a _package_. However, the distinction between the two is important and useful. For example, one important application is packrat, which automates the process of managing project-specific libraries. With packrat, when you upgrade a package in one project, it only affects that project, not every project on your computer. This is useful because it allows you to play around with cutting-edge packages without affecting other projects' use of older, more reliable packages. This is also useful when you're both developing and using a package.
t

> ## Naming your package {#naming}

Reviewer: Maybe this should now go into a new chapter? Like "Creating a package" or similar?

* Pick a unique name you can easily Google. This makes it easy for potential users to 
  find your package (and associated resources) and for you to see who's using it. 
  You can also check if a name is already used on CRAN by loading <http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/[PACKAGE_NAME]>.

* Avoid using both upper and lower case letters: doing so makes the package name
  hard to type and even harder to remember. For example, I can never remember if it's
  Rgtk2 or RGTK2 or RGtk2.

* Find a word that evokes the problem and modify it so that it's unique:

    * plyr is generalisation of the apply family, and evokes pliers.
    * lubridate makes dates and times easier.
    * knitr (knit + r) is "neater" than sweave (s + weave).
    * testdat tests that data has the correct format.

* Use abbreviations: 

    * Rcpp = R + C++ (plus plus)
    * lvplot = letter value plots. 

* Add an extra R: 

    * stringr provides string tools.
    * tourr implements grand tours (a visualisation method).
    * gistr lets you programmatically create and modify GitHub gists.

> If you're creating a package that talks to a commercial service, make sure you check the branding guidelines to avoid problems down the line. For example, rDrop isn't called rDropbox because Dropbox prohibits any applications from using the full trademarked name.

Reviewer: Need to mention available here (with caution about interpreting urban dictionary results)

## Creating a package {#getting-started}

> Once you've come up with a name, there are two ways to create the package. You can use RStudio:

Reviewer: Should we just recommend usethis?
